<!-- Ranger Handbook TC 3-21.76 — Chunk 06 / Pages 126–150 -->

# Chapter 6 — Movement

To survive on the battlefield, stealth, dispersion, and security is enforced in all tactical movements. The leader is skilled in all movement techniques. (Refer to ATP 3-21.8 for more information.)

## FORMATIONS

### 6-1.
**6-1.** Movement formations include elements and Rangers arranged in relation to each other. Fire teams, squads, and platoons use several formations. Formations give the leader control, based on a METT-TC analysis. Leaders position themselves where they can best command and direct the formations, which are shown in figure 6-1. Typical formations are the line, vee, echelon, diamond, wedge, and file.

### 6-2.
**6-2.** Formations allow the fire team leader to lead by example. (Follow me and do as I do!) All Rangers in the team must be able to see their leader.

### 6-3.
**6-3.** Formations also reflect fire team formations. Squad formations are very similar with more Rangers. Squads can operate in lines and files similar to fire teams. When squads operate in wedges or in echelon, the fire teams use those formations and simply arrange themselves in a column or with one team behind the other. Squads may also use the vee, where one team forms the lines of the vee with the squad leader at the front (at the point of the vee) for mission command. Platoons use the same formations as squads. When the unit operates as a platoon, the PL carefully selects the location for the machine guns in the movement formation.

```text
Figure 6-1. Formations
LEGEND
TL – team leader
```

## MOVEMENT TECHNIQUES

### 6-4.
**6-4.** Selecting a movement technique is based on the likelihood of enemy contact and the relative need for speed. Specifically, the factors to consider include control, dispersion, speed, and security. Movement techniques are neither fixed nor are they formations. Instead, movement techniques are distinguished by a set of criteria such as distance between individual Rangers and between teams or squads.

### 6-5.
**6-5.** Movement techniques are not fixed formations. They refer to the distances between Soldiers, teams, and squads that vary based on mission, enemy, terrain, visibility, and any other factor that affects control. There are three movement techniques: traveling, traveling overwatch, and bounding overwatch. The selection of a movement technique is based on the likelihood of enemy contact and the need for speed. (See table 3-5 on page 3-8.) Individual movement techniques include high and low crawl, and three to five second rushes from one covered position to another.

### 6-6.
**6-6.** From these movement techniques, leaders are able to conduct actions on contact, make natural transitions to fire and movement, as well as to conduct tactical mission tasks. When analyzing the situation, some enemy positions are known. However, most of the time enemy positions will only be templated positions. Templated positions are the leader's "best guess" based on analyzing the terrain and his knowledge of the enemy. Throughout the operation, leaders are continuously trying to confirm or deny both the known positions as well as the likely positions. (See table 6-1.)

Table 6-1. Characteristics of movement techniques

| MOVEMENT TECHNIQUES | WHEN NORMALLY USED | Control | Dispersion | Speed | Security |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| Traveling | Contact not likely | More | Less | Fastest | Least |
| Traveling Overwatch | Contact possible | Less | More | Slower | More |
| Bounding Overwatch | Contact expected | Most | Most | Slowest | Most |

### 6-7.
**6-7.** Movement techniques vary depending on METT-TC. However, Rangers must always be able to see their fire team leaders. The platoon leader should be able to see the lead SL. Leaders control movement with hand and arm signals, and use radios only when needed. Leaders match the movement technique to the situation as follows:

1. **Traveling.** Use this technique when enemy contact is not likely but speed is necessary. Leave 10 m between Rangers, and 20 m between squads. Traveling is:
   - More control than traveling overwatch but less controlled than bounding overwatch.
   - Minimum dispersion.
   - Maximum speed.
   - Minimum security.
2. **Traveling overwatch.** Use this technique when enemy contact is possible. This is the most often used movement technique. Leave 20 m between Rangers, and 50 m between teams. Considerations for this technique include—
   - Only the lead squad should use traveling overwatch. However, in cases where greater dispersion is desired, all squads may use it.
   - In other formations, all squads use traveling overwatch unless specified not to by the PL. Traveling overwatch offers good control, dispersion, speed, and security forward.
   - The lead squad is far enough ahead of the rest of the platoon to detect or engage any enemy before the enemy observes or fires on the main body. However, the lead squad stays between 50 and 100 m in front of the platoon so the platoon can support them with small arms fires. This distance is dependent on terrain, vegetation, and light and weather conditions.
3. **Bounding overwatch.** Use when enemy contact is likely or when crossing a danger area. Both squad and platoon have bounding and overwatch elements. The bounding element moves while the other one occupies a position where it can overwatch by fire the bounding element's route. The bounding element remains within firing range of the overwatching element at all times. Considerations for this technique include:
   - Characteristics. Bounding overwatch offers maximum control, dispersion, and security with minimum speed.
   - Types of bounds:
     - Successive bounds. One element moves to a position, and then the overwatching element moves to a position generally online with the first element.
     - Alternating bounds. One element moves into position, and then the overwatching element moves to a position in front of the first element.
   - Length. The length of a bound depends on the terrain, visibility, and control.
   - Instructions. Before a bound, the leader gives the following instructions to subordinates:
     - Direction of the enemy, if known.
     - Position of overwatch elements.
     - Next overwatch position.
     - Route of the bounding element.
     - What to do after the bounding element reaches the next position.
     - How the elements receive follow-on orders.
   - Squad bounding overwatch. Rangers leave about 20 m between them. The distance between teams and squads varies. (See figure 6-2 on page 6-4.)
   - Platoon bounding overwatch. When platoons use bounding overwatch (see figure 6-3 on page 6-5), one squad bounds, a second squad overwatches, and a third awaits orders. Rangers leave about 20 m between them. The distance between teams and squads varies. Forward observers stay with the overwatching squad to call-for-fire. Platoon leaders normally stay with the overwatching squad, which uses machine guns and attached weapons to support the bounding squad. Another technique is to have one squad use bounding overwatch while the other two use traveling or traveling overwatch. When deciding where to move the bounding element, consider the:
     - Enemy's likely action.
     - Mission.
     - Routes to the next overwatch position.
     - Weapon ranges of the overwatching unit.
     - Responsiveness of the rest of the unit.
     - Fields of fire at the next overwatch position.

```text
Figure 6-2. Squad bounding overwatch
```

```text
Figure 6-3. Platoon bounding overwatch
```

## STANDARDS

### 6-8.
**6-8.** Unit moves on designated route or arrives at specified location according to the OPORD, maintaining accountability of all assigned and attached personnel. Unit uses the movement formation and technique ordered by the leader (based on METT-TC). Leaders remain oriented (within 200 m) and follow a planned route, unless METT-TC dictates otherwise.

### 6-9.
**6-9.** During movement, the unit maintains 360-degree security and remains 100 percent alert. During halts, unit maintains 360-degree security and remains at least 75 percent alert. If the unit makes contact with the enemy, they do so with the smallest element possible. The unit uses control measures during movement such as head counts, rally points, or phase lines.

## FUNDAMENTALS

### 6-10.
**6-10.** Mission accomplishment depends on successful land navigation. The patrol should use stealth and vigilance to avoid chance contact. Designate a primary and alternate compass and pace man for each patrol. All leaders except fire team leaders move inside their formations to best control the platoon.

> **Note:** The point man is never tasked to perform compass or pace duties; the sole responsibility is forward security for the element.

### 6-11.
**6-11.** Patrols use stealth, and cover and concealment of the terrain to its maximum advantage. Whenever possible, the patrol should move during limited visibility to maximize the technological advantages of night vision devices (NVDs) and hinder the enemy's ability to detect the patrol. They exploit the enemy's weaknesses, and try to time movements to coincide with other operations that distract the enemy.

### 6-12.
**6-12.** The patrol continues to use active and passive security measures. The leader assigns subunit responsibilities for security at danger areas, PBs, and in the objective area. The leader plans fire support such as mortars, artillery, tactical air, attack helicopter, and naval gunfire.

### 6-13.
**6-13.** The enemy threat and terrain determines which of the three movement techniques to use. Fire teams maintain visual contact, but there is enough distance between them so that the entire patrol does not become engaged if it makes contact. Fire teams can spread their formations to gain better observation to the flanks, as needed. Although widely spaced, Rangers retain their relative positions in their wedge and follow their team leader. Only in extreme situations should the file be used. The lead squad secures the front, and is responsible for navigation. For a long movement, the PL may rotate lead squad responsibilities. The fire team or squad in the rear is charged with rear security. Vary movement techniques to meet the changing situation.

### 6-14.
**6-14.** The patrol achieves 360-degree security, high and low. Within a fire team, squad, and so on, the leader assigns appropriate sectors of fire to subordinates. This ensures the battlefield is covered. This includes trees, multiple storied structures, tunnels, sewers, and ditches.

## TACTICAL MARCHES

### 6-15.
**6-15.** Platoons conduct two types of marches with the company: foot marches and motor (road) marches. A foot march is successful when troops arrive at the destination at the prescribed time, physically able to execute their tactical mission.

### 6-16.
**6-16.** To meet the standard, the unit crosses the start point and release point at the times specified in the order, and follows the prescribed route, rate of march, and interval, without deviation unless required by enemy action or higher headquarters action. The fundamentals of tactical marches include effective control, detailed planning, and rehearsals. Considerations include:

1. **METT-TC.** This stands for—
   - Mission—task and purpose.
   - Enemy—intentions, capabilities, and course of action.
   - Terrain and weather—road condition, trafficability, and visibility.
   - Troops and equipment—condition of Rangers and their loads, number and types of weapons and radios.
   - Time—start time, release time, rate of march, and time available.
   - Civilians—movement through populated areas, refugees, and OPSEC.
2. **Task organization:**
   - Security—advance and trail teams.
   - Main body—the two remaining line squads and weapons squad.
   - Headquarters mission command.
   - Control measures.
3. **Control measures:**
   - Start point and release point (given by higher HQ).
   - Check points—at checkpoints report to higher HQ to remain oriented.
   - Rally or rendezvous points—used when elements become separated.
   - Locations of leaders—where they can best control their elements.
   - Communications plan—location of radios, frequencies, call signs, and OPSKEDs.
   - Dispersion between Rangers:
     - 3–5 m by day.
     - 1–3 m by night.
4. A march order may be issued as an OPORD, FRAGORD, or an annex to either type of order (an operational overlay or strip map is used for this). The march order includes:
   - Formations and order of movement.
   - Route of march, assembly area, start point, release point, rally points, check points, and break or halt points.
   - Start point time, release point time, and rate of march.
   - March interval for squads, teams, and individuals.
   - Actions on enemy contact—air and ground.
   - Actions at halts.
   - Detailed plan of fire support for the march.
   - Water supply plan.
   - Medical evacuation (MEDEVAC) plan.

### 6-17.
**6-17.** Platoons are made up of several Rangers fulfilling different positions and responsibilities. They include the platoon leader, platoon sergeant, squad leaders, security squad, assault squads, medic, and individuals. Their duties before, during, and after the movement are detailed below.

1. **Platoon leader:**
   - Before—issues WARNORD, OPORD, or FRAGORD; inspects and supervises movement preparations.
   - During—ensures unit makes movement time, maintains interval, and remains oriented; maintains security; checks condition of Rangers; spot checks water discipline and field sanitation.
   - After—ensures Rangers are prepared to accomplish their mission, supervises SLs, and ensures Rangers receive medical coverage, as needed.
2. **Platoon sergeant:**
   - Before—helps PL, makes recommendations; enforces uniform and packing lists; and obtains accountability of Rangers prior to start point time.
   - During—controls stragglers, assists PL maintaining proper interval and security.
   - At halts—maintains accountability, enforces security and the welfare of Soldiers, enforces field sanitation and litter discipline, performs preventive medicine, and confirms head count prior to leaving the halt.
   - After—coordinates for water, rations, and medical supplies; recovers any casualties.
3. **Squad leaders:**
   - Before—provides detailed instruction to TLs; inspects boots and socks for serviceability and proper fit, adjustment of equipment, full canteens, and equal distribution of loads.
   - During—controls squad, maintains proper interval between Rangers and equipment, enforces security, and remains oriented.
   - At halts—ensures security is maintained, provides Rangers for water resupply, as detailed. Physically checks the Rangers in his squad; ensures they drink water and change socks, as necessary, and rotates heavy equipment. (Units should plan the latter in detail to avoid confusion before, during, and after halts.)
   - After—occupies squad sector assembly area, conducts foot inspection and reports condition of Soldiers to PL, and prepares them to accomplish the mission.
4. **Security squad:**
   - Serves as point element for platoon, reconnoiters route to the start point (SP). Calls in checkpoints, provides frontal security, and early warning. Maintains rate of march, moves 10 to 20 m in front of main body.
   - Trail team provides rear security, and moves 10 to 20 m behind main body.
5. **Assault squads:**
   - Provides left, right, and rear security for the platoon.
   - Is prepared to provide additional combat power should the security squat receive contact, and moves 10-20 m behind the security squad.
6. **Forward observer/Radiotelephone operator:**
   - Maintains constant communications with higher headquarters, moves with the PL, and sends all reports.
   - Builds field-expedient antennas, as needed.
7. **Medic:**
   - Assesses and treats march casualties.
   - Advises chain of command on evacuation and transportation of casualties.
8. **Individual:**
   - Maintains interval and follows TLs examples.
   - Relays hand and arm signals.
   - Remains alert during movement and at halts.

## MOVEMENT DURING LIMITED VISIBILITY CONDITIONS

### 6-.
**6-.** During hours of limited visibility, the platoon uses surveillance, target acquisition, and night observation (STANO) devices to enhance effectiveness. Leaders must be able to control, navigate, maintain security, and move during limited visibility.

### 6-19.
**6-19.** When visibility is poor, methods that aid in control include moving leaders closer to the front, reducing the platoon speed, and using luminescent tape on equipment. Leaders also reduce the intervals between Soldiers and elements, and executes head counts.

### 6-20.
**6-20.** While navigating during limited visibility, the unit uses the same techniques as in daylight, but leaders exercise more care to keep the patrol oriented. To maintain security, strict noise and light discipline is enforced, and radio listening silence and camouflage is used. Using the terrain to avoid detection by enemy surveillance or NVDs, Rangers make frequent halts to stop, look, listen, and smell (SLLS). Whenever possible, mask the sounds of movement. Rain, wind, and flowing water disguise movement sounds very efficiently.

### 6-21.
**6-21.** Leaders plan detail actions to be taken at rally points. All elements maintain communications at all times. The two techniques for actions at rally points are:

- Minimum force. Patrol members assemble at the rally point, and the senior leader assumes command. When the minimum force (designated in the OPORD) is assembled and organized, the patrol continues the mission.
- Time available. The senior leader determines if the patrol has enough time remaining to accomplish the mission.

### 6-22.
**6-22.** During halts, the unit posts security and covers all approaches into the sector with key weapons. The positions used are:

- Short halt. This typically takes one to two minutes. Rangers seek immediate cover and concealment and take a knee. Leaders assign sectors of fire.
- Long halt. This typically takes more than two minutes. Rangers assume the prone position behind cover and concealment. Leaders ensure Rangers have clear fields of fire, and assign sectors of fire.

## DANGER AREAS

### 6-23.
**6-23.** A danger area is any place on a unit's route where the leader determines the unit may be exposed to enemy observation or fire. Some examples of danger areas are open areas, roads and trails, urban terrain, enemy positions, and natural and manmade obstacles. Bypass danger areas whenever possible.

### 6-24.
**6-24.** There are standards, fundamentals, and techniques for crossing danger areas. Rangers take the following steps:

1. **Standards.** The unit—
   - Prevents the enemy from surprising the main body.
   - Moves all personnel and equipment across the danger area.
   - Prevents decisive engagement by the enemy.
2. **Fundamentals:**
   - Designate nearside and farside rally points.
   - Secure nearside, left and right flank, and rear security.
   - Reconnoiter and secure the far side.
   - Cross the danger area.
   - Plan for fires on all known danger areas.
3. **Techniques for crossing danger areas:**
   - Linear danger area (LDA) actions for a squad (see figure 6-4 on page 6-10):
     - STEP 1. The Alpha team leader observes the LDA and sends the hand and arm signal to the SL, who determines to bound across.
     - STEP 2. SL directs the Alpha team leader to move the team across the LDA far enough to fit the remainder of the squad on the farside of the LDA. Bravo team moves to the LDA to the right or left to provide an overwatch position prior to the A team crossing.
     - STEP 3. SL receives the hand and arm signal that it is safe to move the rest of the squad across (B team is still providing overwatch).
     - STEP 4. SL moves with radiotelephone operator (RTO) and B team across the LDA. (A team provides overwatch for squad missions.)
     - STEP 5. The A team assumes original azimuth at SLs command or by hand and arm signal.
   - LDA crossing for a platoon:
     - The lead squad halts the platoon and signals danger area.
     - Platoon leader moves forward to the lead squad to confirm the danger area, and then decides if current location is suitable for crossing.
     - Platoon leader confirms danger area or crossing site and establishes nearside and farside rally points.
     - On the PLs signal, the trail squad moves forward to establish left and right nearside security.
     - Once nearside security is established, the A team of the lead squad with the SL, moves across to confirm there is enough room to fit the rest of the platoon on the farside of the LDA.
     - Once he conducts SLLS, the SL signals the PL, "ALL CLEAR." During daylight, the signal can be something such as thumbs up. At night, use something such as an infrared or red lens.
     - The PL then directs the B team of the lead squad to bound across by team and link up with the A team of the lead squad and pick up a half step while the rest of the platoon crosses.
     - Platoon leader then crosses with RTO, FO, WSL, and one gun team.
     - Once across, PL signals the second squad in movement to cross.
     - PSG with medic and one gun team crosses after second squad is across (sterilizing central crossing site).
     - PSG signals security squad to cross at their location.
     - PSG calls PL via FM radio to confirm all elements are across.
     - PL directs lead squad to pick up normal rate of movement.

> **Note:** Platoon leader plans fires on all known larger danger area crossing sites. Nearside security in overwatch sterilizes signs of the patrol.

```text
Figure 6-4. Linear danger area
```

- Danger area (small or open):
  - The lead squad halts the platoon and signals "danger area."
  - PL moves forward to the lead squad to confirm the danger area.
  - Platoon leader confirms danger area and establishes nearside and farside rally points.
  - PL designates lead squad to bypass danger area using the detour bypass method.
  - Paceman suspends current pace count and initiates an interim pace count. Alternate pace and compass man moves forward and offsets compass 90 degrees left or right as designated, and moves in that direction until clear of danger area.
  - After moving set distance (as instructed by PL), lead squad assumes original azimuth and primary paceman resumes original pace.
  - After the open area, the alternate pace and compass Soldier offsets the compass 90 degrees left or right, and leads the platoon or squad the same distance (in meters) back to the original azimuth.
- Danger areas (series): two or more danger areas within an area that can be either observed or covered by fire. This includes:
  - Double linear danger area (LDA technique and cross as one).
  - Linear or small open danger area (use bypass or contour technique (See figure 6-5 on page 6-12.)
  - Linear or large open danger area (use platoon wedge when crossing).

> **Note:** A series of danger areas are crossed using the technique that provides the most security.

```text
Figure 6-5. Small open danger area
```

- Danger area (large):
  - Lead squad halts the platoon, and signals danger area.
  - Platoon leader moves forward with RTO and FO and confirms danger area.
  - Platoon leader confirms danger area and establishes near and farside rally points.
  - PL designates direction of movement.
  - PL designates change of formation as necessary to ensure security.

> **Note:** Platoon leader plans for all larger danger area crossing sites. Nearside security in overwatch sterilizes signs of the patrol. Before point man steps into danger area, PL and FO adjust targets to cover movement. If farside of danger area is within 250 m, PL establishes overwatch and designates lead squad to clear wood line on far side.

# Chapter 7 — Patrols

To survive on the battlefield, stealth, dispersion, and security is enforced in all tactical movements. The leader is skilled in all movement techniques. (Refer to ATP 3-21.8 for more information.)

## PRINCIPLES

### 7-1.
**7-1.** All patrols are governed by five principles: planning, reconnaissance, security, control, and common sense. In brief, each principle involves—

- Planning: quickly make a simple plan and effectively communicate it to the lowest level. A great plan that takes forever to complete and is poorly disseminated is not a great plan. Plan and prepare to a realistic standard and rehearse everything.
- Reconnaissance: your responsibility as a Ranger leader is to confirm what you think you know, and to learn that which you do not already know.
- Security: preserve your force as a whole. Every Ranger and every rifle counts, either one could be the difference between victory and defeat.
- Control: clarify the concept of the operation and commander's intent, coupled with disciplined communications, to bring every Soldier and weapon available to overwhelm the enemy at the decisive point.
- Common sense: use all available information and good judgment to make sound, timely decisions.

## PLANNING

### 7-2.
**7-2.** Planning considerations common to most patrols include task organization, initial planning and coordination, completion of the plan, and contingency planning. A patrol is a detachment sent out by a larger unit to conduct a specific mission.

### 7-3.
**7-3.** Patrols operate semi-independently and return to the main body upon completion of their mission. Patrolling fulfills the Infantry's primary function of finding the enemy to engage them or report their disposition, location, and actions. Patrols act as the eyes and ears of the larger unit; and as a fist to deliver a sharp, devastating jab and then withdraw before the enemy can recover. Some definitions associated with patrols are—

- Patrol: sent out by a larger unit to conduct a specific combat, reconnaissance, or security mission. A patrol's organization is temporary and specifically matched to the immediate task. Because a patrol is an organization, not a mission, it is not correct to speak of giving a unit a mission to "patrol."
- Patrolling or conducting a patrol: the semi-independent operation conducted to accomplish the patrol's mission. A patrol requires a specific task and purpose.
- Employment: the commander sends a patrol out from the main body to conduct a specific tactical task with an associated purpose. Upon completion of that task, the patrol leader returns to the main body, reports to the commander and describes the events that took place, the status of the patrol's members, and equipment, and any observations that were made.
- Leadership: if a patrol is made up of an organic unit such as a rifle squad, the SL is responsible. If a patrol is made up of mixed elements from several units, an officer or noncommissioned officer is designated as the patrol leader. This temporary title defines their role and responsibilities for that mission. The patrol leader may designate an assistant, normally the next senior Soldier in the patrol, and any subordinate element leaders required.
- Size: a patrol can be a unit as small as a fire team. Squad-size and platoon-size patrols are normal. Sometimes, for combat tasks such as a raid, the patrol can consist of most of the combat elements of a rifle company. Unlike operations in which the Infantry platoon or squad is integrated into a larger organization, the patrol is semi-independent and relies on itself for security.

### 7-4.
**7-4.** There are common elements of all patrols and teams. Elements and teams for platoons conducting patrols include—

- Reconnaissance and surveillance (R&S) teams: normally used in a zone reconnaissance, but may be useful in any situation when it is impractical to separate the responsibilities for reconnaissance and security. When these responsibilities are separate, the security element provides security at danger areas, secures the ORP, isolates the objective, and supports the withdrawal of the rest of the platoon once the reconnaissance is complete. The security element may have separate security teams, each with an assigned task or sequence of tasks.
- Assault element: seizes and secures the objective and protects special teams as they complete their assigned actions on the objective.
- Security element: provides security at danger areas, secures the ORP, isolates the objective, and supports the withdrawal of the rest of the patrol once actions on the objective are complete. The security element may have separate security teams, each with an assigned task or sequence of tasks.
- Support element: provides direct and indirect fire support for the unit. Direct fires include machine guns, medium and light anti-armor weapons, and small recoilless rifles. The available indirect fires may include mortars, artillery, CAS, and organic M320 weapon systems.
- Demolition team: responsible for preparing and detonating the charges to destroy designated equipment, vehicles, or facilities on the objective.
- Enemy prisoner of war (EPW) and search teams: the assault element may provide two-Ranger (buddy teams) or four-Ranger (fire team) search teams to search bunkers, buildings, or tunnels on the objective. These teams search the objective or kill zone for any PIR that may give the PL an idea of the enemy concept for future operations. Primary and alternate teams may be assigned to ensure enough prepared personnel are available on the objective.
- Breach element: conducts initial penetration of enemy obstacles to seize a foothold and allow the patrol to enter an objective. This is typically done according to METT-TC and the steps outlined in the Conduct the Initial Breach of a Mined Wire Obstacle in Chapter 8 of this publication.
- Reconnaissance teams: reconnoiter the objective area from various vantage points once the security teams are in position. Normally, reconnaissance teams are two-soldier teams, to reduce the possibility of detection.

## INITIAL PLANNING AND COORDINATION

### 7-5.
**7-5.** Leaders plan and prepare for patrols using the troop leading procedures and estimation of the situation, as described in Chapter 2. Through an estimate of the situation, leaders identify required actions on the objective (mission analysis) and plan backward to departure from friendly lines and forward to reentry of friendly lines. Because patrolling units act independently, move beyond the direct fire support of the parent unit and operate forward of friendly units. Coordination is thorough, detailed, and continuous throughout planning and preparation. PLs use checklists to avoid omitting any items vital to the accomplishment of the mission.

### 7-6.
**7-6.** Coordination with higher HQ includes intelligence, operations, and fire support. This initial coordination is an integral part of the troop leading procedures (Step 3, make a tentative plan). The leader also coordinates the unit's patrol activities with the leaders of other units that will be patrolling in adjacent areas at the same time.

## COMPLETION OF PLAN

### 7-7.
**7-7.** As the PL completes the plan, specified and implied tasks are considered. The PL ensures that all specified tasks to be performed on the objective, at rally points, danger areas, security or surveillance locations, along the route(s), and at passage lanes are assigned. These make up the maneuver and tasks to maneuver units subparagraphs of the execution paragraph.

### 7-8.
**7-8.** The PL also considers key travel and execution times. The leader estimates time requirements for movement to the objective, leader's reconnaissance of the objective, establishment of security and surveillance, completion of all assigned tasks on the objective, and passage through friendly lines. Some planning factors are—

- Movement: average of one kilometer per hour (kph) during daylight hours in woodland terrain and average limited visibility of 1/2 kph. Add additional time for restrictive or severely restrictive terrain, such as mountains, swamps, or thick vegetation.
- Leader's reconnaissance: not later than (NLT) 1.5 hours.
- Establishment of security and surveillance: 0.5 hour.

### 7-9.
**7-9.** The leader selects primary and alternate routes to and from the objective. The return routes should differ from the routes to the objective. The PL may delegate route selection to a subordinate, but is ultimately responsible for the routes selected.

### 7-10.
**7-10.** The leader should consider the use of special signals. These include hand and arm signals, flares, voice, whistles, radios, and infrared equipment. Primary and alternate signals must be identified and rehearsed so that all Rangers know their meaning. Password systems to consider are—

- Odd number system. The leader specifies an odd number. The challenge can be any number less than the specified number. The password is the number that must be added to it to equal the specified number. For example, the number is seven, the challenge is three, and the password is four.
- Running password. This code word alerts a unit that friendly Rangers are approaching in a less than organized manner and possibly under pressure. The number of Rangers approaching follows the running password. For example, if the running password is "Ranger," and five friendly Rangers are approaching, they would say, "Ranger five."

### 7-11.
**7-11.** Always know the location of leaders. The PL considers where the PSG and other key leaders are located during each phase of the mission. The PL is positioned to best control the actions of the patrol. The PSG is normally located with the assault element during a raid or attack to help the PL control the use of additional assaulting squads, and assist with securing the objective (OBJ). The PSG locates at the casualty collection point (CCP) to facilitate casualty treatment and evacuation. During a reconnaissance mission, the PSG stays behind in the ORP to facilitate the transfer of intelligence to the higher HQ, and control the reconnaissance elements movement into and out of the ORP.

### 7-12.
**7-12.** Unless required by the mission, the unit avoids enemy contact. The leader's plan addresses actions on enemy contact at each phase of the patrol mission. The unit's ability to continue depends on how early contact is made, whether the platoon is able to break contact successfully (so that its subsequent direction of movement is undetected), and whether the unit receives any casualties due to the contact. The plan addresses the handling of seriously wounded Rangers and those KIA. The plan also addresses the handling of prisoners who are captured because of chance contact but are not part of the planned mission.

### 7-13.
**7-13.** The leader leaves the unit for many reasons throughout the planning, coordination, preparation, and execution of the patrol mission. Each time the leader departs the patrol main body, a five-point contingency plan is issued to the leader left in charge of the unit. The patrol leader issues additional specific guidance stating what tasks are to be accomplished in his absence. The contingency plan is remembered using the memory aid GOTWA:

```text
G  Where the leader is GOING.
O  OTHERS he is taking with him.
T  TIME the leader plans to be gone.
W  WHAT to do if the leader does not return in time.
A  ACTIONS by the unit in the event contact is made while the
   leader is gone. (A stay-behind leader is designated until returning.)
```

### 7-14.
**7-14.** The leader considers the use and location of rally points. A rally point is a place designated by the leader where the unit moves to reassemble and reorganize if it becomes dispersed. Rangers know which rally point to move to at each phase of the patrol mission should they become separated from the unit. They also know what actions are required there and how long they are to wait at each rally point before moving to another. The most common types of rally points include initial, en route, objective, and nearside and farside rally points. Rally points must be—

- Easily identifiable in daylight and limited visibility.
- Show no signs of recent enemy activity.
- Covered and concealed from the ground and air.
- Away from natural lines of drift and high-speed avenues of approach.
- Defendable for short periods of time.

### 7-15.
**7-15.** The objective rally point typically lies 200 to 400 m from the objective, or at a minimum, one major terrain feature away. Actions at the ORP include—

- Conducting SLLS and pinpoint location.
- Conducting a leader's reconnaissance of the objective.
- Issuing a FRAGORD, if needed.
- Making final preparations before continuing operations. (For example, recamouflage; prepare demolitions; line up rucksacks for quick recovery; prepare EPW bindings, first aid kits, and litters; and inspect weapons.
- Accounting for Rangers and equipment after completing actions on the objective.
- Disseminating information from reconnaissance, if no contact was made.

### 7-16.
**7-16.** The plan includes a leader's reconnaissance of the objective once the platoon or squad establishes the ORP. Before departing, the leader issues a five-point contingency plan. During reconnaissance, the leader pinpoints the objective; selects reconnaissance, security, support, and assault positions for the elements; and adjusts the plan based on observation of the objective.

### 7-17.
**7-17.** Each type of patrol requires different tasks during the leader's reconnaissance. The leader brings different elements with him. These are discussed separately under each type of patrol. The leader plans time to return to the ORP, complete the plan, disseminate information, issue orders and instructions, and allow the squads to make any additional preparations. During the Leader's Reconnaissance for a Raid or Ambush, the PL leaves surveillance on the objective. Each type of patrol also requires different actions on the objective. Actions on the objective are discussed under each type of patrol.

## RECONNAISSANCE PATROLS

### 7-.
**7-.** Area and zone reconnaissance patrols provide timely and accurate information on the enemy and terrain, and confirm the leader's plan before it is executed. Units on reconnaissance operations collect specific information (PIR) or general information based on the instructions from their higher commander.

### 7-19.
**7-19.** In order to have a successful area reconnaissance, the PL applies the fundamentals of the reconnaissance to the plan while conducting the operation. To obtain required information, the parent unit tells the patrol leader what information is needed. This is in the form of the information requirement and priority intelligence requirements. The platoon's mission is then tailored to what information is required. During the entire patrol, members continuously gain and exchange all information gathered, but cannot consider the mission accomplished unless all PIR has been gathered.

### 7-20.
**7-20.** A patrol avoids letting the enemy know that it is in the objective area. If the enemy knows they are being observed, they may move, change plans, or increase security measures. Methods of avoiding detection are—

- Minimizing movement in the objective area (area reconnaissance).
- Moving no closer to the enemy than necessary.
- Using long-range surveillance or NVDs, if possible.
- Using camouflage, stealth, and noise and light discipline.
- Minimizing radio traffic.

### 7-21.
**7-21.** A patrol must be able to break contact and return to the friendly unit with what information is gathered. If necessary, they break contact and continue the mission. Leaders emplace security elements where they can overwatch the reconnaissance elements. They suppress the enemy so the reconnaissance element can break contact.

### 7-22.
**7-22.** When the platoon leader receives the order, the mission is analyzed to ensure it is understood what is to be done. The PL task-organizes the platoon to accomplish the mission according to METT-TC. A reconnaissance is typically a squad-sized mission. The types of reconnaissance are—

- Area reconnaissance: the area reconnaissance patrol collects all available information on PIR and other intelligence not specified in the order for the area. The patrol completes the reconnaissance and reports all information by the time specified in the order. The patrol is not compromised.
- Zone reconnaissance: the zone reconnaissance patrol determines all PIR and other intelligence not specified in the order for its assigned zone. The patrol reconnoiters without detection by the enemy. The patrol completes the reconnaissance and reports all information by the time specified in the order.

## ACTIONS ON THE OBJECTIVE, AREA RECONNAISSANCE

### 7-23.
**7-23.** The element occupies the ORP as discussed in the section on occupation of the ORP. (See figure 7-1 [page 7-6].) The RTO reports to higher HQ that the unit has occupied the ORP. The leader confirms the location on the map while subordinate leaders make necessary perimeter adjustments. The PL organizes the platoon in one of two ways: separate reconnaissance and security elements, or combined reconnaissance and security elements.

### 7-24.
**7-24.** The PL takes subordinate leaders and key personnel on a leader's reconnaissance to confirm the objective and plan. The PL also—

- Issues a five-point contingency plan before departure.
- Establishes a suitable RP that is beyond sight and sound of the objective if possible, but that is definitely out of sight. The RP should also have good rally point characteristics.
- Allows all personnel to become familiar with the RP and surrounding area.
- Identifies the objective and emplaces surveillance, designates a surveillance team to keep the objective under surveillance, and issues a contingency plan to the senior Soldier remaining with the surveillance team. The surveillance team is positioned with one Soldier facing the objective, and one facing back in the direction of the RP.
- Takes subordinate leaders forward to pinpoint the objective, establish a limit of advance (LOA), and choose vantage points.
- Maintains communications with the platoon throughout the leader's reconnaissance.

### 7-25.
**7-25.** The PSG maintains security, supervises priorities of work in the ORP, and reestablishes security at the ORP. The PSG also disseminates the PLs contingency plan, oversees preparation of reconnaissance personnel (Soldiers recamouflaged, NVDs and binoculars prepared, weapons on safe with a round in the chamber, and other duties).

### 7-26.
**7-26.** The PL and reconnaissance party return to the ORP. The PL confirms the plan or issues a FRAGORD, and allows subordinate leaders time to disseminate the plan.

### 7-27.
**7-27.** The patrol conducts the reconnaissance by long-range observation and surveillance, if possible. R&S element moves to observation points that offer cover and concealment and are outside of small arms range, establishes a series of OPs if information cannot be gathered from one location, and gathers all PIR using the SALUTE format.

### 7-28.
**7-28.** If necessary, the patrol conducts its reconnaissance by short-range observation and surveillance (see figure 7-1), moves to an observation post near the objective, passes close enough to the objective to gain information, and gathers all PIR using the SALUTE format.

### 7-29.
**7-29.** R&S teams move using a technique such as the cloverleaf method to move to successive OPs. (See figure 7-1.) In this method, R&S teams avoid paralleling the objective site, maintain extreme stealth, do not cross the LOA, and maximize the use of available cover and concealment.

### 7-30.
**7-30.** During the conduct of the reconnaissance, each R&S team returns to the RP when any of the following occurs:

- All their PIR is gathered.
- The LOA is reached.
- The allocated time to conduct the reconnaissance has elapsed.
- Enemy contact is made.

```text
Figure 7-1. Area reconnaissance
LEGEND
ORP – objective rally point; RP – release point; S&O – surveillance and observation
```

### 7-31.
**7-31.** At the RP, the leader analyzes what information has been gathered and determines if it meets the PIR requirements. If the leader determines that insufficient information to meet the PIR requirements has been gathered, or if the information he and the subordinate leader gathered differs drastically, R&S teams may be sent back to the objective site. In this case, R&S teams alternate areas of responsibilities. For example, if one team reconnoitered from the 6–3–12, then that team now reconnoiters from the 6–9–12.

### 7-32.
**7-32.** The R&S element returns undetected to the ORP by the specified time, and disseminates information to all patrol members through key leaders, or moves to a position at least one terrain feature or one kilometer away to disseminate. To disseminate, the leader has the RTO prepare three sketches of the objective site based on the leader's sketch and provides copies to the subordinate leaders to assist in dissemination. The R&S element reports any information requirements or any information requiring immediate attention to higher HQ, and departs for the designated area.

### 7-33.
**7-33.** If contact is made, the R&S element moves to the RP. The reconnaissance element tries to break contact and return to the ORP, secure rucksacks, and quickly move out of the area. Once they have moved a safe distance away, the leader informs higher HQ of the situation and takes further instructions from them:

1. While emplacing surveillance, the reconnaissance element withdraws through the RP to the ORP, and follows the same procedures as above.
2. While conducting the reconnaissance, the compromised element returns a sufficient volume of fire to allow them to break contact. Surveillance can fire an AT-4 at the largest weapon on the objective. All elements pull off the objective and move to the RP. The senior leader quickly accounts for all personnel and returns to the ORP. Once in the ORP, leadership follows the procedures previously described. The critical tasks for a patrol are:
   - Secure and occupy the ORP.
   - Conduct a leader's reconnaissance of the objective:
     - Estimate RP.
     - Pinpoint objective.
     - Emplace surveillance with the surveillance and observation (S&O) team. Position security element, if used.
   - Conduct reconnaissance by long-range surveillance, if possible.
   - Conduct reconnaissance by short-range surveillance, if necessary.
   - Teams:
     - Move as necessary to successive observation posts.
     - On order, return to RP.
     - Once PIR is gathered, return to ORP.
   - Patrol:
     - Linkup as directed in the ORP.
     - Disseminate information before moving.

## ACTIONS ON THE OBJECTIVE, ZONE RECONNAISSANCE

### 7-34.
**7-34.** The element occupies the initial ORP, as discussed. The radio operator calls in "SPARE" for occupation of the ORP. The leader confirms the location on the map while subordinate leaders make necessary perimeter adjustments.

1. **Organization.** The reconnaissance team leaders organize their reconnaissance elements:
   - Designate security and reconnaissance elements.
   - Assign responsibilities (point man, pace man, en route recorder, and rear security), if not already assigned.
   - Designates easily recognizable rally points.
   - Ensures local security at all halts.
2. **Actions.** The patrol reconnoiters the zone:
   - Moves tactically to the ORPs.
   - Occupies designated ORPs.
   - Follows the method designated by the PL (fan, converging routes, or box method). (See table 7-1.)
   - The reconnaissance teams reconnoiter:
     - During movement, the squad gathers all PIR specified in the order.
     - Reconnaissance team leaders ensure sketches are drawn or digital photos are taken of all enemy hard sites, roads, and trails.
     - Return to the ORP or linkup at the rendezvous point on time.
     - When the squad arrives at a new rendezvous point or ORP, the reconnaissance team leader's report to the PL with all gathered information.
   - The PL continues to control the reconnaissance elements:
     - Moves with the reconnaissance element that establishes the rendezvous point.
     - Changes reconnaissance methods, as required.
     - Designates times for the elements to return to the ORP, or to linkup.
     - Collects all information and disseminates it to the entire patrol. PL briefs all key subordinate leaders on information gathered by other squads; establishing one consolidated sketch, if possible; and allows team leaders time to brief their teams.
     - With the PSG, accounts for all personnel.
   - The patrol continues the reconnaissance until all designated areas have been reconnoitered, and returns undetected to friendly lines.

Table 7-1. Reconnaissance methods

| FAN METHOD | CONVERGING ROUTES METHOD | BOX METHOD |
|---|---|---|
| Uses a series (fan) of ORPs. Patrol establishes security at first ORP. Each reconnaissance element moves from the ORP along a different fan-shaped route. Route overlaps with that of other reconnaissance elements. This ensures reconnaissance of the entire area. Leader maintains a reserve at the ORP. When all reconnaissance elements return to the ORP, PL collects and disseminates all information before moving to the next ORP. | PL selects routes from the ORP through zone to a rendezvous point at the farside of the zone from the ORP. Each reconnaissance element moves and reconnoiters along a specified route. They converge (linkup) at one time and place. | PL sends reconnaissance elements from the first ORP along routes that form a box, and then sends other elements along routes throughout the box. All teams linkup at the farside of the box from the ORP. |

```text
LEGEND
ORP – objective rally point; PL – platoon leader
```

## COMBAT PATROLS

### 7-35.
**7-35.** Combat patrols are the second type of patrol. Combat patrols are further divided into raids, ambushes, and security patrols. Units conduct combat patrols to destroy or capture enemy soldiers or equipment; destroy installations, facilities, or key points; or harass enemy forces. Combat patrols also provide security for larger units.

### 7-36.
**7-36.** In planning a combat patrol, the PL considers the following:

1. **Tasks to maneuver units.** Normally the platoon HQ element controls the patrol on a combat patrol mission. The PL makes every effort to maintain squad and fire team integrity, as tasks are assigned to subordinate units.
   - The PL considers the requirements for assaulting the objective, supporting the assault by fire, and security of the entire unit throughout the mission.
     - For the assault on the objective, the PL considers the required actions on the objective, the size of the objective, and the known or presumed strength and disposition of the enemy on and near the objective.
     - The PL considers the weapons available, and the type and volume of fires required to provide fire support for the assault on the objective.
     - The PL considers the requirement to secure the platoon at points along the route, at danger areas, at the ORP, along enemy avenues of approach into the objective, and elsewhere during the mission.
     - The PL also designates engagement and disengagement criteria.
   - The PL assigns additional tasks to the squads for demolition, search for EPWs, guarding EPWs, treatment and evacuation (litter teams) of friendly casualties, and other tasks required for successful completion of patrol mission (if not already in the SOP)
   - The PL determines who controls any attachments of skilled personnel or special equipment.
2. **Leader's reconnaissance of the objective.** In a combat patrol, the PL has additional considerations for the conduct of the reconnaissance of the objective from the ORP.
   - Composition of the leader's reconnaissance party. The platoon leader normally brings the following personnel:
     - Squad leaders, including the weapons squad leader.
     - Surveillance team.
     - Forward observer.
     - Security element (depending on time available)
   - Conduct of the leader's reconnaissance. In a combat patrol, the PL considers the following additional actions in the conduct of the leader's reconnaissance of the objective:
     - The PL designates an RP about halfway between the ORP and the objective, using the same characteristics as a rally point. The PL then issues a five-point contingency plan to the security element and the PL, FO, and surveillance team move to pinpoint the OBJ and emplace the surveillance team with eyes-on the OBJ. PL then moves back to the RP and emplaces the security element.
     - The PL confirms the location of the objective or kill zone, notes the terrain, and identifies where Claymore mines are emplaced to cover dead space. Any change to the plan is issued to the SLs (while overlooking the objective, if possible).
     - If the objective is the kill zone for an ambush, the leader's reconnaissance party should not cross the objective: to do so leaves tracks that may compromise the mission.
     - The PL confirms the suitability of the assault and support positions, and routes from them back to the ORP.
     - The PL issues a five-point contingency plan to the surveillance team before returning to the ORP.

## AMBUSH

### 7-37.
**7-37.** An ambush is a surprise attack from a concealed position on a moving or temporarily halted target. Ambushes are categorized as hasty or deliberate, divided into two types—point or area, and the formation is linear or L-shaped.

### 7-38.
**7-38.** The leader considers various key factors in determining the ambush category, type, and formation; and from these decisions, develops the ambush plan.

- Key factors include:
  - Coverage (ideally, the whole kill zone) by fire.
  - METT-TC.
  - Existing or reinforcing obstacles, including Claymore mines, to keep the enemy in the kill zone.
  - Security teams usually have hand-held antitank weapons such as AT-4s or light antitank weapons (LAWs), Claymore mines, and various means of communication.
  - Security elements or teams to isolate the kill zone.
  - Protection of the assault and support elements with Claymore mines or explosives.
  - Assault through the kill zone to the LOA.

  > **Note:** The assault element must be able to move quickly through its own protective obstacles.

  - Time the actions of all elements of the platoon to preclude loss of surprise. In the event any member of the ambush is compromised, the leader may immediately initiate the ambush.
  - When the ambush is manned for a long time, use only one squad to conduct the entire ambush and determine movement time of the rotating squads from the ORP to the ambush site.
- Categories include:
  - Hasty. A unit conducts a hasty ambush when it makes visual contact with an enemy force and has time to establish an ambush without being detected. The actions for a hasty ambush are well rehearsed so that Rangers know what to do on the leader's signal. They also know what actions to take if the unit is detected before it is ready to initiate the ambush.
  - Deliberate. A deliberate ambush is conducted at a predetermined location against any enemy element that meets the commander's engagement criteria. The leader requires the following detailed information in planning a deliberate ambush: size and composition of the targeted enemy, and weapons and equipment available to the enemy.
- Types are:
  - Point. In a point ambush, Rangers deploy to attack an enemy in a single kill zone.
  - Area. In an area, Rangers deploy in two or more related point ambushes.
  - Anti-armor. An anti-armor ambush focuses on moving or temporarily halted enemy armored vehicles.
- Formations (see figure 7-2 on page 7-11):
  - Linear. In an ambush using a linear formation, the assault and support elements deploy parallel to the enemy's route. This positions both elements on the long axis of the kill zone and subjects the enemy to flanking fire. This formation can be used in close terrain that restricts the enemy's ability to maneuver against the platoon or in open terrain, provided a means of keeping the enemy in the kill zone can be effected.
  - L-shaped. In an L-shaped ambush, the assault element forms the long leg parallel to the enemy's direction of movement along the kill zone. The support element forms the short leg at one end and at a right angle to the assault element. This provides both flanking (long leg) and enfilading (short leg) fires against the enemy. The L-shaped ambush can be used at a sharp bend in a trail, road, or stream. It should not be used where the short leg would have to cross a straight road or trail.

```text
Figure 7-2. Ambush formations
```

## HASTY AMBUSH

### 7-39.
**7-39.** The platoon moves quickly to concealed positions. The ambush is not initiated until the majority of the enemy is in the kill zone. The unit does not become decisively engaged but surprises the enemy. The patrol captures, kills, or forces the withdrawal of the entire enemy within the kill zone.

### 7-40.
**7-40.** On order, the patrol withdraws all personnel and equipment in the kill zone from observation and direct fire. The unit does not become decisively engaged by follow-on elements. The platoon continues follow-on operations. Actions on the objective are as follows (see figure 7-3 on page 7-12):

- Using visual signals, any Ranger alerts the unit that an enemy force is in sight. The Ranger continues to monitor the location and activities of the enemy force until the team or squad leader relieves him, and gives the enemy location and direction of movement.
- The platoon or squad halts and remains motionless:
  - The PL gives the signal to conduct a hasty ambush, taking care not to alert the enemy of the patrol's presence.
  - The leader determines the best nearby location for a hasty ambush and uses arm and hand signals to direct the unit members to covered and concealed positions.
- The leader designates the location and extent of the kill zone.
- Teams and squads move silently to covered and concealed positions, ensuring positions are undetected and have good observation and fields of fire into the kill zone.
- Security elements move out to cover each flank and the rear of the unit. The leader directs the security elements to move a given distance, set up, and then rejoin the unit on order or after the ambush (the sound of firing ceases). At squad level, the two outside buddy teams normally provide flank security, as well as fires into the kill zone. At platoon level, fire teams make up the security elements.
- The PL assigns sectors of fire and issues any other commands necessary, such as control measures.
- The PL initiates the ambush, using the greatest casualty-producing weapon available, when the largest percentage of enemy is in the kill zone. The PL:
  - Controls the rate and distribution of fire.
  - Employs indirect fire to support the ambush.
  - Orders cease-fire.
  - If the situation dictates, orders the patrol to assault through the kill zone.
- The PL designates personnel to conduct a hasty search of enemy personnel, and process enemy prisoners and equipment.
- The PL orders the platoon to withdraw from the ambush site along a covered and concealed route.
- The PL gains accountability, reorganizes as necessary, disseminates information, reports the situation, and continues the mission as directed.

```text
Figure 7-3. Hasty ambush
LEGEND
PL – platoon leader
```
