<!-- Ranger Handbook TC 3-21.76 — Chunk 07 / Pages 151–175 -->

# CHAPTER 7 — PATROLS (continued)

## DELIBERATE (POINT/AREA) AMBUSH

### **7-41.**
The ambush is emplaced NLT the time specified in the order. The patrol surprises the enemy and engages their main body, killing or capturing all enemy in the kill zone, and destroying equipment based on the commander's intent. The patrol withdraws all personnel and equipment from the objective, on order, within the time specified in the order. The patrol obtains all available PIR from the ambush and continues follow-on operations. Actions on the objective are as follows (see figure 7-4 on page 7-15):

1. The PL prepares the patrol for the ambush in the ORP.
2. The PL prepares to conduct a leader's reconnaissance:
   - Designates the members of the leader's reconnaissance party (SLs, surveillance team, FO, and possibly the security element).
   - Issues a contingency plan to the PSG.
3. The PL conducts the leader's reconnaissance:
   - Ensures the leader's reconnaissance party moves undetected.
   - Confirms the objective location and suitability for the ambush.
   - Selects a kill zone.
   - Posts the surveillance team at the site and issues a contingency plan.
   - The security team(s) occupy prior to the PL reconnoitering the assault or support-by-fire positions, securing the flanks of the ambush site and providing early warning. A security team remains in the ORP if the patrol plans to return to the ORP after actions on the objective. If the ORP is abandoned, a rear security team should be emplaced " after "plan" and before "confirms." The OBJ must be secure prior to initiating reconnaissance of the assault or SBF positions.
   - Confirms suitability of assault and support positions, and routes from the positions to the ORP.
   - Selects position for each weapon system in SBF position, and then designates sectors of fire.
   - Identifies all offensive control measures to be used. Identifies the probable line of deployment (PLD), the assault position, LOA, any boundaries or other control measures. If available, the PL can use infrared aiming devices to identify these positions on the ground.
4. The PL adjusts the plan based on information from the reconnaissance:
   - Assigns positions.
   - Designates withdrawal routes.
5. The PL confirms the ambush formation.
6. Support element leader assigns sectors of fire:
   - Emplaces Claymore mines and obstacles, as designated.
   - Identifies sectors of fire and emplaces limiting stakes, or uses metal-to-metal contact with the machine gun tripod to prevent fratricide on the objective.
   - Overwatches the movement of the assault element into position.
7. Once the support element is in position, or on the PLs order, the assault element:
   - Departs the ORP and moves into position.
   - Upon reaching the assault position, leaders identify individual sectors of fire, as assigned by the PL. Emplaces aiming stakes.
   - Emplaces Claymore mines to help destroy the enemy in the kill zone.
   - Camouflages positions.
8. The security element spots the enemy and notifies the PL with reports on the direction of movement, size of the target, and any special weapons or equipment carried. The security element also keeps the PL informed if any enemy forces are following the lead force.
9. The PL alerts other elements and determines if the enemy force is too large, or if the ambush can engage the enemy successfully.
10. The PL initiates the ambush using the highest casualty-producing device. The PL may use a command-detonated Claymore mine, and plans a backup method for initiating the ambush, in case the primary means fails. This should also be a casualty-producing device, such as an individual weapon. This information is passed to all Rangers, and practiced during rehearsals.
11. The PL ensures that the assault and support elements deliver fire with the heaviest, most accurate volume possible on the enemy in the kill zone. In limited visibility, the PL may use infrared lasers to define specific targets in the kill zone.
12. Before assaulting the target, the PL gives the signal to lift or shift fires.
13. The assault element:
    - Assaults before the remaining enemy can react.
    - Kills or captures enemy in the kill zone.
    - Uses individual movement techniques or bounds by fire teams to move.
    - Upon reaching the LOA, halts and establishes security. If needed, it reestablishes the chain of command and key weapon systems. All Rangers load a fresh magazine or drum of ammunition using the buddy system. LACE reports are submitted through the chain of command. The PL submits an initial contact report to higher HQ.
14. The PL directs special teams (EPW search, aid and litter, demolition) to accomplish their assigned tasks once the assault element has established its LOA:
    - Once the kill zone is clear, collect and secure all EPWs and move them out of the kill zone before searching their bodies. Coordinate for an EPW exchange point to linkup with higher HQ to extract all EPWs and treat them according to secure, search, segregate, safeguard, and speed (5-Ss).
    - Search from one side to the other and mark bodies that have been searched to ensure the area is thoroughly covered. Units should use the clear out/search in the intelligence technique (clear from the center of the objective and out), ensuring the area is clear of all enemy combatants. Then search all enemy personnel towards the center of the objective. Search all dead enemy personnel using the two-Ranger search technique:
      - As the search team approaches a dead enemy soldier, one Ranger guards while the other Ranger searches. First, kick the enemy's weapon away.
      - Second, roll the body over (if on the stomach) by lying on top and when given the go-ahead by the guard (who is positioned at the enemy's head), the searcher rolls the body over on him. This is done for protection in case the enemy soldier has a grenade with the pin pulled underneath him.
      - The searchers then conduct a systematic search of the dead soldier from head to toe, removing all papers and anything new (different type rank, shoulder boards, different unit patch, pistol, weapon, or NVD). They note if the enemy has a fresh or shabby haircut and the condition of the uniform and boots. They note the radio frequency, and then they secure the SOI, maps, documents, and overlays.
      - Once the body has been thoroughly searched, the search team continues in this manner until all enemy personnel in and near the kill zone have been examined.
    - Identify, collect, and prepare all equipment to be carried back or destroyed.
    - Evacuate and treat friendly wounded first, then enemy wounded if time permits.
    - The demolition team prepares dual primed explosives or incendiary grenades and awaits the signal to initiate. This is normally the last action performed before the unit departs the objective and may signal the security elements to return to the ORP.
    - All actions on the objective with stationary assault line are the same, with the exception of the search teams. To provide security within the teams to the farside of the kill zone during the search, they work in three-Ranger teams. Before the search begins, the Rangers move all KIAs to the near side of the kill zone.
15. If enemy reinforcements try to penetrate the kill zone, the flank security engages to prevent the assault element from being compromised.
16. The PL directs the units' withdrawal from the ambush site:
    - Elements normally withdraw in the reverse order when they established their positions.
    - The elements may return to the RP or directly to the ORP, depending on the distance between elements.
    - The security element of the ORP is alert to assist the platoon's return to the ORP. It maintains security for the ORP while the rest of the platoon prepares to leave.
    - If possible, all elements should return to the location where they separated from the main body. This location should usually be the RP.
17. The PL and PSG direct actions at the ORP, including accountability of personnel and equipment, and recovery of rucksacks and other equipment left at the ORP during the ambush.
18. The PL disseminates information, or moves the platoon to a safe location (no less than one kilometer or one terrain feature away from the objective) and disseminates information.
19. As required, the PL and FO execute indirect fires to cover the platoon's withdrawal.

```text
Figure 7-4. Deliberate ambush

LEGEND
LOA – limit of advance; OBJ – objective; ORP – objective rally point;
PL – platoon leader; RECON - reconnoiter
```

## PERFORMING A RAID

### **7-42.**
The patrol initiates the raid NLT the time specified in the order, surprises the enemy, assaults the objective, and accomplishes its assigned mission within the commander's intent. The patrol does not become decisively engaged en route to the objective. The patrol obtains all available PIR from the raid objective and continues follow-on operations:

#### a. Planning considerations.
A raid is a form of attack, usually small scale, involving a swift entry into hostile territory to secure information, confuse the enemy, or destroy installations, followed by a planned withdrawal. Squads do not conduct raids. The sequence of platoon actions for a raid is similar to those for an ambush. Additionally, the assault element of the platoon may have to conduct a breach of an obstacle. It may have additional tasks to perform on the objective, such as demolition of fixed facilities. Fundamentals of the raid include:

- Surprise and speed. Infiltrate and surprise the enemy without being detected.
- Coordinated fires. Seal off the objective with well-synchronized direct and indirect fires.
- Violence of action. Overwhelm the enemy with fire and maneuver.
- Planned withdrawal. Withdraw from the objective in an organized manner, maintaining security.

#### b. Actions on the objective (raid).
(See figure 7-5 on page 7-.)

1. The patrol moves to and occupies the ORP according to the patrol SOP. The patrol prepares for the leader's reconnaissance.
2. The PL, SLs, and selected personnel conduct a leader's reconnaissance:
   - PL leaves a five-point contingency plan with the PSG.
   - PL establishes the RP; pinpoints the objective; contacts the PSG to prepare Soldiers, weapons, and equipment; emplaces the surveillance team to observe the objective; and verifies and updates intelligence information. Upon emplacing the surveillance team, the PL provides a five-point contingency plan.
   - Security teams are brought forward on the leader's reconnaissance and emplaced before the leader's reconnaissance leaves the RP.
   - Leader's reconnaissance verifies location of and routes to security, support, and assault positions.
   - Leader's conduct the reconnaissance without compromising the patrol.
   - Leader's normally conduct a reconnaissance of SBF position first, then the assault position.
3. The PL confirms, denies, or modifies the plan and issues instructions to SLs.
   - Assigns positions and withdrawal routes to all elements.
   - Designates control measures on the objective (element objectives, lanes, limits of advance, target reference points, and assault line).
   - Allows SLs time to disseminate information and confirm that their elements are ready.
4. Security elements occupy designated positions, moving undetected into positions that provide early warning and can seal off the objective from outside support or reinforcement.
5. The support element leader moves the support element to designated positions. The support element leader ensures the element can place well-aimed fire on the objective.
6. The PL moves with the assault element into the assault position. The assault position is normally the last covered and concealed position before reaching the objective. As it passes through the assault position, the platoon deploys into its assault formation. Its squads and fire teams deploy to place the bulk of their firepower to the front as they assault the objective. They also:
   - Make contact with the surveillance team to confirm any enemy activity on the objective.
   - Ensure that the assault position is close enough for immediate assault, if the element is detected early.
   - Move into position undetected, and establish local security and fire control measures.
7. Element leaders inform the PL when their elements are in position and ready.
8. The PL initiates the raid and directs the support element to fire.
9. Upon gaining fire superiority, the PL directs the assault element to move towards the objective:
   - Assault element holds fire until engaged, or until ready to penetrate the objective.
   - PL signals the support element to lift or shift fires. The element lifts or shifts fires as directed, shifting fire to the flanks of targets or areas as directed in the order.
10. The assault element attacks and secures the objective. The assault element may be required to breech a wire obstacle. As the platoon or its assault element moves onto the objective, it increases the volume and accuracy of fires. Squad leaders assign specific targets or objectives for their fire teams. Only when these direct fires keep the enemy suppressed can the rest of the unit maneuver. As the assault element gets closer to the enemy, there is more emphasis on suppression and less on maneuver. Ultimately, all but one fire team may be suppressing to allow that one fire team to break into the enemy position. Throughout the assault, Rangers use proper individual movement techniques, and fire teams retain their basic shallow wedge formation. The platoon does not get "on line" to sweep across the objective:
    - Assault element assaults through the objective to the designated LOA.
    - Assault element leaders establish local security along the LOA, and consolidate and reorganize as necessary. They provide LACE reports to the PL and PSG. The platoon establishes security, reorganizes key weapons, provides first aid, and prepares wounded Rangers for MEDEVAC. They redistribute ammunition and supplies, and relocate selected weapons to alternate positions if leaders believe that the enemy may have pinpointed them during the attack. They adjust other positions for mutual support. The squad and team leader provide LACE reports to the PL. The PL or PSG reorganizes the patrol based on the contact:
      - On order, special teams accomplish all assigned tasks under the supervision of the PL, who is positioned to control the patrol.
      - Special team leaders report to PL when assigned tasks are complete.
11. On order or signal of the PL, the assault element withdraws from the objective. Using prearranged signals, the assault line begins an organized withdrawal from the objective site, maintaining control and security throughout the withdrawal. The assault element bounds back near the original assault line and begins a single file withdrawal through the antipersonnel land mine choke point. All Rangers move through the choke point for an accurate count. Once the assault element is a safe distance from the objective and the headcount is confirmed, the platoon can withdraw the support element. If the support elements were a part of the assault line, they withdraw together and security is signaled to withdraw. Once the support is a safe distance off the objective, they notify the PL, who contacts the security element and signals them to withdraw. All security teams linkup at the RP and notify the PL before moving to the ORP. Personnel returning to the ORP immediately secure their equipment and establish all-around security. Once the security element returns, the platoon moves out of the objective area as soon as possible:
    - Before withdrawing, the demolition team activates devices and charges.
    - Support element or designated personnel in the assault element maintain local security during the withdrawal.
    - Leaders report updated accountability and status to the PL and PSG.
12. Squads withdraw from the objective in the order designated in the order to the ORP:
    - Account for personnel and equipment.
    - Disseminate information.
    - Redistribute ammunition and equipment as required.
13. The PL reports mission accomplishment to higher HQ and continues the mission:
    - Reports raid assessment to higher HQ.
    - Informs higher HQ of any information requirements and PIR gathered.

```text
Figure 7-5. Actions on the objective, raid

LEGEND
CONT. - continued; LOA – limit of advance; OBJ – objective;
ORP – objective rally point; PL – platoon leader; RECON – reconnaissance;
RP – release point; S&O – surveillance and observation
```

## SUPPORTING TASKS

### **7-43.**
Supporting tasks include a linkup, patrol debriefing, and occupation of an ORP. A linkup is a meeting of friendly ground forces. Linkups depend on control, detailed planning, communications, and stealth. This includes:

#### a. Task standard.
The unit's linkup at the time and place specified in the order. The enemy does not surprise the main bodies. The linkup units establish a consolidated chain of command.

#### b. Site selection.
The leader identifies a tentative linkup site by map reconnaissance, other imagery, or higher HQ designates a linkup site. The linkup site should have the following characteristics:

- Ease of recognition.
- Cover and concealment from ground and air.
- No tactical value to the enemy.
- Location away from natural lines of drift.
- Defendable for a short period of time.
- Multiple access and escape routes.

#### c. Execution.
Linkup procedure begins as the unit moves to the linkup point. The steps of this procedure are:

1. The stationary unit performs linkup actions:
   - Occupies the linkup rally point NLT the time specified in the order.
   - Establishes all-around security, establishes communications, and prepares to accept the moving unit.
   - The security team clears the immediate area around the linkup point. It then marks the linkup point with the coordinated recognition signal. The security team moves to a covered and concealed position, and observes the linkup point and immediate area around it.
2. The moving unit:
   - Performs linkup actions.
   - The unit reports its location using phase lines, checkpoints, or other control measures.
   - Halts at a safe distance from the linkup point in a covered and concealed position (the linkup rally point).
3. The PL and a contact team:
   - Prepare to make physical contact with the stationary unit.
   - Issue a contingency plan to the PSG.
   - Maintain communications with the platoon, and verifies near and far recognition signals for linkup (good visibility and limited visibility).
   - Exchange far and near recognition signals with the linkup unit; conduct final coordination with the linkup unit.
4. The stationary unit:
   - Guides the patrol from its linkup rally point to the stationary unit linkup rally point.
   - Linkup is complete by the time specified in the order.
   - The main body of the stationary unit is alerted before the moving unit is brought forward.
5. The patrol continues its mission according to the order.

#### d. Coordination checklist.
The PL coordinates or obtains the following information from the unit that the patrol will linkup with:

- Exchange frequencies, call signs, codes, and other communication information.
- Verify near and far recognition signals.
- Exchange fire coordination measures.
- Determine command relationship with the linkup unit; plan for consolidation of chain of command.
- Plan actions following linkup.
- Exchange control measures such as phase lines and contact points, as appropriate.

### **7-44.**
Immediately after the platoon or squad returns, personnel from higher HQ conduct a thorough debrief. This may include all members of the platoon or the leaders, RTOs, and any attached personnel. Normally, the debriefing is oral. Sometimes a written report is required. Information on the written report should include:

- Size and composition of the unit conducting the patrol.
- Mission of the platoon, such as type of patrol, location, and purpose.
- Departure and return times.
- Routes. Use checkpoints and grid coordinates for each leg, or include an overlay.
- Detailed description of terrain and enemy positions that were identified.
- Results of any contact with the enemy.
- Unit status at the conclusion of the patrol mission, including the disposition of dead or wounded Rangers.
- Conclusions or recommendations.

### **7-45.**
The ORP is a point out of sight, sound, and small arms range of the objective area. It is normally located in the direction that the platoon plans to move after completion of actions on the objective. The ORP is tentative until the objective is pinpointed. This includes:

#### a. Occupation of the ORP.
(See figure 7-6.)

1. The patrol halts beyond sight and sound of the tentative ORP (200-to-400 m in good visibility, 100-to-200 m in limited visibility).
2. The patrol establishes a security halt according to the unit SOP.
3. After issuing a five-point contingency plan to the PSG, the PL moves forward with a reconnaissance element to conduct a leader's reconnaissance of the ORP.
4. For a squad-sized patrol, the PL moves forward with a compass man and one member of each fire team to confirm the ORP.
   - After physically clearing the ORP location, the PL leaves two Rangers at the 6 o'clock position facing in opposite directions.
   - The PL issues a contingency plan and returns with the compass man to guide the patrol forward.
   - The PL guides the patrol forward into the ORP, with one team occupying from 3 o'clock through 12 o'clock to 9 o'clock, and the other occupying from 9 o'clock through 6 o'clock to 3 o'clock.
5. For a platoon-sized patrol, the PL, RTO, WSL, three ammunition bearers, a team leader, a squad automatic weapon (SAW) gunner, and riflemen. Go on the leader's reconnaissance for the ORP, and position themselves at 10, 2, and 6 o'clock.
   - First squad in the order of march is the base squad, occupying from 10 to 2 o'clock. They are arranged:
   - Trail squads occupy from 2 to 6 o'clock and 6 to 10 o'clock, respectively.
   - Patrol HQ element occupies the center of the triangle.

#### b. Actions in the ORP.
The unit prepares for the mission in the ORP. Once the leader's reconnaissance pinpoints the objective, the PSG generally lines up rucksacks according to unit SOP, in the center of the ORP.

```text
Figure 7-6. Occupation of the objective rally point

LEGEND
M – meter; ORP – objective rally point; PL platoon leader;
RECON - reconnaissance
```

### **7-46.** Patrol base.
A PB is a security perimeter that is set up when a squad or platoon conducting a patrol halts for an extended period. Patrol bases should not be occupied for more than a 24-hour period (except in an emergency). A patrol never uses the same PB twice.

#### a. Use.
PBs are typically used:

- To avoid detection by eliminating movement.
- To hide a unit during a long, detailed reconnaissance.
- To perform maintenance on weapons, equipment, eat, and rest.
- To plan and issue orders.
- To reorganize after infiltrating an enemy area.
- To establish a base from which to execute several consecutive or concurrent operations.

#### b. Site selection.
The leader selects the tentative site from a map or by aerial reconnaissance. Characteristics of a PB include a site that is easily defendable for short periods of time, away from natural lines of drift, away from high-speed avenues of approach, provides cover and concealment from both ground, and provides little to no tactical advantage to the enemy. The site's suitability is confirmed and secured before the unit moves into it. Plans to establish a PB include selecting an alternate PB site. The alternate site is used if the first site is unsuitable or the patrol unexpectedly evacuates.

#### c. Planning considerations.
Leaders planning for a PB consider the mission, and passive and active security measures. A PB is located to allow the unit to accomplish its mission. This includes:

- Observation posts and communication with observation posts.
- Patrol or platoon fire plan.
- Alert plan.
- Withdrawal plan from the PB, including withdrawal routes and a rally point, rendezvous point, or alternate PB.
- A security system to make sure that specific Rangers are awake at all times.
- Enforcement of camouflage, noise, and light discipline.
- The conduct of required activities with minimum movement and noise.
- Priorities of work.

#### d. Security measures:

- Select terrain the enemy would probably consider of little tactical value.
- Select terrain that is off main lines of drift.
- Select difficult terrain that would impede foot movement, such as an area of dense vegetation, preferably bushes and trees that spread close to the ground.
- Select terrain near a source of water.
- Select terrain that can be defended for a short period, and that offers good cover and concealment.
- Avoid known or suspected enemy positions.
- Avoid built up areas.
- Avoid ridges and hilltops, except as needed for maintaining communications.
- Avoid small valleys.
- Avoid roads and trails.

#### e. Occupation.
(See figure 7-7.)

1. A PB is reconnoitered and occupied in the same manner as an ORP, with the exception that the platoon typically plans to enter at a 90-degree turn. The PL leaves a two-Ranger observation post at the turn, and the patrol covers any tracks from the turn to the PB.
2. The platoon moves into the PB. Squad-sized patrols generally occupy a cigar-shaped perimeter; platoon-sized patrols generally occupy a triangle-shaped perimeter.
3. The PL and another designated leader inspect and adjust the entire perimeter, as necessary.
4. After the PL has checked each squad sector, each SL sends a two-Ranger R&S team to the PL at the command post (CP). The PL issues the three R&S teams a contingency plan, reconnaissance method, and detailed guidance on what to look for (enemy, water, built-up areas or human habitat, roads, trails, or possible rally points).

```text
Figure 7-7. Patrol base

LEGEND
METT-TC - mission, enemy, terrain and weather, troops and support-time available,
and civil considerations; OP – observation post; ORP – objective rally point;
PL – platoon leader; R&S – reconnaissance and surveillance
```

5. Where each R&S team departs is based on the PLs guidance. The R&S team moves a prescribed distance and direction, and reenters where the PL dictates.
   - Squad-sized patrols do not normally send out an R&S team at night.
   - R&S teams prepare a sketch of the area to the squad front, if possible.
   - The patrol remains 100 percent alert during this reconnaissance.
   - If the PL feels the patrol was tracked or followed, he may elect to wait in silence at 100 percent alert before sending out R&S teams.
   - The R&S teams may use methods such as the "I," the "Box," or the "T." Regardless of the method chosen, the R&S team must be able to provide the PL with the same information.
   - Upon completion of R&S, the PL confirms or denies the PB location and either moves the patrol or begins priorities of work.

#### f. Passive (clandestine) patrol base (squad):

- The purpose of a passive PB is for a squad or smaller-size element to rest.
- Unit moves as a whole and occupies in force.
- Squad leader ensures that the unit moves in at a 90-degree angle to the order of movement.
- A Claymore mine is emplaced on the route entering the PB.
- Alpha and Bravo teams sit back-to-back facing outward, ensuring that at least one individual on each team is alert and providing security.

#### g. Priorities of work (platoon and squad).
Once the PL is briefed by the R&S teams and determines the area is suitable for a PB, the leader establishes or modifies defensive work priorities in order to establish the defense of the PB. Priorities of work are not a laundry list of tasks to be completed; to be effective, priorities of work consist of a task, a given time, and a measurable performance standard. For each priority of work, a clear standard is issued to guide the element in the successful accomplishment of each task. It is also designated whether the work is controlled in a centralized or decentralized manner. Priorities of work are determined according to METT-TC and may include, but are not limited to the following tasks:

1. Security (continuous):
   - Prepare to use all passive and active measures to cover the entire perimeter at all times, regardless of the percentage of weapons used to cover all of the terrain.
   - Readjust after R&S teams return, or readjust based on current priority of work (such as weapons maintenance).
   - Employ all elements, weapons, and personnel to meet conditions of the terrain, enemy, or situation.
   - Assign sectors of fire to all personnel and weapons. Develop squad sector sketches and platoon fire plan.
   - Confirm location of fighting positions for cover, concealment and observation, and fields of fire. SLs supervise placement of aiming stakes and Claymore mines.
   - Only use one point of entry and exit, and count personnel in and out. Everyone is challenged, according to the unit SOP.
   - Hasty fighting positions are prepared at least inches deep (at the front) and sloping gently from front to rear, with a grenade sump, if possible.
2. Withdrawal plan. The PL designates the signal for withdrawal, order of withdrawal, and the platoon rendezvous point or alternate PB.
3. Communication (continuous). Communications are maintained with higher HQ, OPs, and within the unit. This may be rotated between the patrol's RTOs to allow accomplishment of continuous radio monitoring, radio maintenance, act as runners for the PL, or conduct other priorities of work.
4. Mission preparation and planning. The PL uses the PB to plan, issue orders, rehearse, inspect, and prepare for future missions.
5. Weapons and equipment maintenance. The PL ensures that machine guns, weapon systems, communications equipment, and night vision devices (as well as other equipment) are maintained. These items are not disassembled at the same time for maintenance (no more than 33 percent at a time), and weapons are not disassembled at night. If one machine gun is down, then security for all remaining systems is raised.
6. Water resupply. The PSG organizes watering parties, as necessary. The watering party carries canteens in an empty rucksack or duffel bag, and has communications and a contingency plan prior to departure.
7. Mess plan. At a minimum, security and weapons maintenance are performed prior to mess. Normally, no more than half the platoon eats at one time. Rangers typically eat one-to-three meters behind their fighting positions.
   - Rest and sleep plan management. The patrol conducts rest as necessary, to prepare for future operations.
   - Alert plan and stand to. The PL states the alert posture and the stand to time. The plan ensures all positions are checked periodically, OPs are relieved periodically, and at least one leader is always alert. The patrol typically conducts stand to at a time specified by the unit SOP, such as 30 minutes before and after begin evening nautical twilight (BMNT) or ending evening nautical twilight (EENT).
   - Resupply. Distribute or cross-load ammunition, meals, equipment, and other items.
   - Sanitation and personal hygiene. The PSG and medic ensure a slit trench is prepared and marked. All Rangers brush their teeth; wash faces; shave; and wash hands, armpits, groin, and feet. The patrol does not leave trash behind.

## MOVEMENT TO CONTACT

### **7-47.**
The movement to contact (MTC) is one of the five types of offensive operations. An MTC gains or regains contact with the enemy. Once contact is made, the unit develops the situation. Normally, a platoon conducts an MTC as part of a larger force. The two techniques for conducting an MTC are search and attack (S&A), and cordon and search.

#### a. Search and attack.
The search and attack technique is used when the enemy is dispersed, expected to avoid contact, disengaged or withdraws, or their movement in an area is denied. The search and attack technique involves the use of multiple platoons, squads, and fire teams coordinating their actions to make contact with the enemy. Platoons typically try to find the enemy, and then fix and finish them. They combine patrolling techniques with the requirement to conduct hasty or deliberate attacks once the enemy has been found.

1. Planning considerations:
   - Factors of METT-TC.
   - Requirement for decentralized execution.
   - Requirement for mutual support.
   - Length of operations.
   - Minimize soldier's load to improve stealth and speed.
   - Resupply and MEDEVAC.
   - Positioning key leaders and equipment.
   - Employment of key weapons.
   - Requirement for PBs.
   - Concept for entering the zone of action.
   - Concept for linkups while in contact.
2. Critical performance measures.
   - The platoon locates the enemy without being detected.
   - Once engaged, fixes the enemy in position and maneuvers against the enemy.
   - Maintains security throughout actions to avoid being flanked.

#### b. Cordon and search.
A technique of conducting an MTC that involves isolating a target area and searching suspect locations within that target area to capture or destroy possible enemy forces and contraband. A platoon uses the cordon and search technique as part of a larger unit. It can be tasked as the cordon or the search element for the company or battalion.

1. Planning. Immediately on receipt of the mission, the company-level commander conducts a reconnaissance of the target to be searched. Ideally, the intelligence officer (S-2) can provide maps or satellite imagery. If possible, avoid sending a patrol to the area of the target since the patrol may unnerve the target and cause them to flee prior to the search. However, depending on how much information that a commander has, he may have no alternative to conduct a reconnaissance to determine where the target is located. The patrol may not alert the target if patrols frequent the area, but the patrol does not need to loiter in the area any longer than necessary.
2. Preparing. Rehearsals are key to a successful cordon and search operations, units should develop their own requirements for what to rehearse.
3. Organization of cordon and search elements:
   - Outer cordon element: security and support element.
   - Inner cordon element: search element.
   - Assault force: detention and collection element.
4. Execution. As the unit approaches the objective, the inner cordon and assault forces make sure they have allowed enough time for the outer cordon force to set before actually arriving at the target. The locals know the sound of military vehicles, and any subversive element who may be home will likely try to flee on hearing the unit approach. While the impact may not be immediate, vehicles and foot traffic (aside from curious onlookers) around the objective will decline quickly once the outer cordon is set, facilitating the movement of other elements to the objective.

## TASK STANDARDS

### **7-48.**
The platoon moves NLT the time specified in the order, and makes contact with the smallest element possible. The main body is not surprised by the enemy. Once the platoon makes contact, it maintains contact. The platoon destroys squad-sized and smaller-sized elements, and fixes elements larger than a squad. The platoon maintains sufficient fighting force capable of conducting further combat operations.

### **7-49.**
Reports of enemy locations and contact are forwarded. If not detected by the enemy, the PL initiates a hasty attack. The platoon sustains no casualties from friendly fire. The platoon is prepared to initiate further movement within 25 minutes of contact, and all personnel and equipment are accounted for.

# CHAPTER 8 — BATTLE DRILLS

This chapter provides battle drills that are standard collective actions made in response to common battle occurrences. Graphic examples can be found in Appendix A. Quick reference cards can be found in Appendix B. (For more information, see ATP 3-21.8.)

A drill is a collective action (or task) is performed by a platoon or smaller element without the application of a deliberate decision-making process. It is initiated on a cue, accomplished with minimal leader orders, and performed to standard throughout like units in the Army. The action is vital to success in combat operations, or critical to preserving life. It usually involves fire or maneuver. The drill is initiated on a cue, such as an enemy action or a leader's brief order, and is a trained response to the given stimulus.

## REACT TO DIRECT FIRE CONTACT (07-3-D9501)

**CONDITIONS:** The unit is moving or halted. The enemy initiates direct fire contact on the unit.

**CUE:** This drill begins when the enemy initiates direct fire contact.

**STANDARDS:** The element in contact returns fire immediately and seeks cover. Element in contact locates the enemy and places well-aimed fire on known enemy position(s). The leader can point out at least one-half of the enemy positions and identify the types of weapons (such as small arms, and light machine guns). Unit leader reports the contact to higher headquarters.

### TASK STEPS

1. The element in contact immediately returns well-aimed fire on known enemy position(s). Vehicles move out of the beaten zone.
2. Soldiers and vehicles assume the nearest covered and concealed position. Mounted Soldiers dismount the vehicle, provide local security and add its suppressive fire against the enemy position. (See figure 8-1 on page 8-2.)

```text
Figure 8-1. 07-3-D9501. Assuming nearest covered position
```

3. Element leaders locate and engage known enemy positions with well-aimed fire or battlesight fire command, and pass information to the unit leader and Soldiers.
4. Element leaders control the fire of their Soldiers by using standard fire commands (initial and supplemental) containing the following elements:
   1. Alert.
   2. Weapon or ammunition (optional).
   3. Target description.
   4. Direction.
   5. Range.
   6. Method.
   7. Control (optional).
   8. Execution.
   9. Termination.
5. Soldiers and vehicle commanders maintain contact (visual or oral) with the leader, other Soldiers, and vehicles on their left or right.
6. Soldiers maintain contact with the team leader and indicate the location of enemy positions. Vehicle commanders relay all commands to the mounted Infantry squads.
7. Unit leaders (visually or orally) check the status of their personnel.
8. Element leaders maintain visual contact with the unit leader.
9. The unit leader moves up to the element in contact and links up with its leader:
   1. Unit leader brings the radiotelephone operator, forward observer, element leader of the nearest element, one crew-served weapon team (machine gun team, if available).
   2. Element leaders of the elements not in contact move to the front of their element.
   3. The platoon sergeant moves forward with the remaining crew-served weapons and links up with the unit leader, and assumes control of the support element. (See figure 8-2 on page 8-4.)

```text
Figure 8-2. 07-3-D9501. Control of the support element
```

10. The unit leader determines whether or not the unit must move out of the engagement area.
11. The unit leader determines whether or not the unit can gain and maintain suppressive fires with the element already in contact (based on the volume and accuracy of enemy fires against the element in contact).
12. The unit leader makes an assessment of the situation and identifies—
    1. The location of the enemy position and obstacles.
    2. The size of the enemy force engaging the unit in contact. (The number of enemy automatic weapons, the presence of any vehicles, and the employment of indirect fires are indicators of enemy strength.)
    3. Vulnerable flanks.
    4. Covered and concealed flanking routes to the enemy positions.
13. The unit leader decides whether to conduct an assault, bypass (if authorized by the company commander), or break contact.
14. The unit leader reports the situation to higher headquarters and begins to maneuver the unit.

## CONDUCT A PLATOON ASSAULT (07-3-D9514)

**CONDITIONS:** The platoon is moving as part of a larger force conducting a movement to contact or an attack. The enemy initiates direct fire contact on the lead squad.

**CUE:** This drill begins when the enemy initiates direct fire contact.

**STANDARDS:** The platoon lead squad locates and suppresses the enemy, establishes supporting fire, and assaults the enemy position using fire and maneuver. The platoon destroys or causes the enemy to withdraw, and consolidates and reorganizes.

### TASK STEPS

1. The platoon conducts action on enemy contact. The squad or section in contact reacts to contact by immediately returning well-aimed fire on known enemy positions. Dismounted Soldiers assume the nearest covered positions. Vehicles move out of the beaten zone and Soldiers dismount the vehicle. The element in contact attempts to achieve suppressive fires. The element leader notifies the platoon leader of the action.
2. Platoon leader gives the command to dismount the vehicles. The platoon sergeant takes control of the vehicles.
3. The platoon leader, radiotelephone operator, forward observer, squad leader of the next squad, and one machine gun team move forward to linkup with the squad leader of the squad in contact.
4. The squad leader of the trail squad moves to the front of the lead fire team.
5. The weapons squad leader and second machine gun team move forward and linkup with the platoon leader. If directed, the weapons squad leader assumes control of the base-of-fire element and positions the machine guns to add suppressive fires against the enemy.
6. Platoon sergeant repositions vehicles, as necessary, to provide observation and supporting fire against the enemy.
7. The platoon leader assesses the situation.
8. If the squad in contact cannot achieve suppressive fire, the squad leader reports to the platoon leader.
   1. The squad in contact establishes a base of fire. The squad leader deploys the squad to provide effective, sustained fires on the enemy position. The squad leader reports the final position to the platoon leader.
   2. The remaining squads (not in contact) take up covered and concealed positions in place, and observe to the flanks and rear of the platoon.
   3. The platoon leader moves forward with the radiotelephone operator, platoon forward observer, squad leader of the nearest squad, and one machine gun team.
9. Lead squad locates the enemy.
   1. The squad leader of the squad in contact reports the enemy size and location, and any other information to the platoon leader. The platoon leader completes the squad leader's assessment of the situation.
   2. The squad continues to engage the enemy's position.
   3. The weapons squad leader moves forward with the second machine gun team and links up with the platoon leader.
   4. The platoon sergeant repositions vehicles, as necessary, to provide observation and supporting fire against the enemy.
10. Lead squad suppresses the enemy:
    1. The platoon leader determines if the squad in contact can gain suppressive fire against the enemy based on the volume and accuracy of the enemy's return fire.
       1. If the answer is YES, the platoon leader directs the squad (with one or both machine guns) and vehicle element in contact to continue suppressing the enemy:
          - The squad in contact destroys or suppresses enemy weapons that are firing most effectively against it; normally crew-served weapons.
          - The vehicle section in contact destroys or suppresses enemy weapons that were firing most effectively against them, including vehicles and crew-served weapons.
          - The squad in contact places screening smoke (M203/320) to prevent the enemy from seeing the maneuver element.
       2. If the answer is NO, the platoon leader deploys another squad, second vehicle section, and the second machine gun team to suppress the enemy position. (The platoon leader may direct the trail leader to position this squad and vehicle section, and weapons squad leader to position one or both machine gun teams in a better support-by-fire position.)
    2. The platoon leader again determines if the platoon can gain suppressive fires against the enemy.
       1. If the answer is YES, the platoon leader continues to suppress the enemy with the two squads, two machine guns, and vehicle-mounted weapons.
          - The trail squad leader assumes control of the base-of-fire element (squad in contact, machine gun teams, and any other squads designated by the platoon leader).
          - The platoon sergeant assumes control of the vehicle section and base-of-fire element (squad in contact and machine gun teams designated by the platoon leader).
          - The platoon forward observer calls for and adjusts fires based on the platoon leader's directions. (The platoon leader does not wait for indirect fires before continuing with his actions.)
       2. If the answer is still NO, the platoon leader deploys the last squad to provide flank and rear security; guide the rest of the company forward, as necessary; and report the situation to the company commander. Normally, the platoon becomes the base-of-fire element for the company and may deploy the last squad to add suppressive fires. The platoon continues to suppress or fix the enemy with direct and indirect fire, and responds to orders from the company commander.
11. Platoon assaults the enemy position. If the squad(s) in contact, together with the machine gun(s) and vehicle element can suppress the enemy, the platoon leader determines if the remaining squad(s) that are not in contact can maneuver.
    1. The platoon leader makes the following assessment:
       1. Location of enemy positions and obstacles.
       2. Size of enemy force. (The number of enemy automatic weapons, the presence of any vehicles, and the employment of indirect fires are indicators of enemy strength.)
       3. Vulnerable flank.
       4. Covered and concealed flanking route to the enemy position.
    2. If the answer is YES, the platoon leader maneuvers the squad(s) into the assault:
       1. Once the platoon leader has ensured that the base-of-fire element is in position and providing suppressive fires, he leads the assaulting squad(s) to the assault position.
       2. If the vehicle section can effectively suppress the enemy element, the platoon leader may reposition the weapons squad or machine gun to an intermediate or local support-by-fire position to provide additional suppression during the assault.
       3. Once in position, the platoon leader gives the prearranged signal for the base-of-fire element to lift or shift direct fires to the opposite flank of the enemy position. (The assault element MUST pick up and maintain effective fires throughout the assault. Handover of responsibility for direct fires from the base-of-fire element to the assault element is critical.)
       4. The platoon forward observer shifts indirect fires to isolate the enemy position.
       5. The assaulting squad(s) fight through enemy positions using fire and maneuver. The platoon leader controls the movement of the squads, assigns specific objectives for each squad, and designates the main effort or base maneuver element. The base-of-fire element must be able to identify the near flank of the assaulting squad(s).
       6. In the assault, the squad leader determines the way in which to move the elements of the squad based on the volume and accuracy of enemy fire against the squad, and the amount of cover afforded by the terrain. In all cases, each Soldier uses individual movement techniques, as appropriate.
          1. The squad leader designates one fire team to support the movement of the other team by fires.
          2. The squad leader designates a distance or direction for the team to move and accompanies one of the fire teams.
          3. Soldiers must maintain contact with team members and leaders.
          4. Soldiers time their firing and reloading in order to sustain their rate of fire.
          5. The moving fire team proceeds to the next covered position. Teams use the wedge formation when assaulting. Soldiers move in rushes or by crawling.
          6. The squad leader directs the next team to move.
          7. If necessary, the team leader directs Soldiers to bound forward as individuals within buddy teams. Soldiers coordinate their movement and fires with each other within the buddy team, and maintain contact with their team leader.
          8. Soldiers fire from covered positions. They select the next covered position before moving and rushing forward (no more than five seconds), or use high or low crawl techniques based on terrain and enemy fires.
    3. If the answer is NO, or the assaulting squad(s) cannot continue to move, the platoon leader deploys the squad(s) to suppress the enemy and reports to the company commander. The platoon continues suppressing enemy positions and responds to the orders of the company commander.
12. The platoon consolidates on the objective once the assaulting squad(s) seize the enemy position:
    1. Establishes local security.
    2. Platoon leader signals for the base-of-fire element to move up into designated positions.
    3. Platoon leader assigns sectors of fire for each squad and vehicle.
    4. Platoon leader positions key weapons and vehicles to cover the most dangerous avenue(s) of approach.
    5. Platoon sergeant begins coordination for ammunition resupply.
    6. Soldiers take up hasty defensive positions.
    7. Platoon leader and forward observer develop a quick fire plan.
    8. Squads place out observation points to warn of enemy counterattacks.
13. Platoon organizes by:
    1. Reestablishing the chain of command.
    2. Redistributing and resupplying ammunition.
    3. Manning crew-served weapons first.
    4. Redistributing critical equipment such as radios; chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear equipment; and night vision devices.
    5. Treating casualties and evacuating wounded.
    6. Filling vacancies in key positions.
    7. Searching, silencing, segregating, safeguarding, and speeding enemy prisoners of war to collection points.
    8. Collecting and reporting enemy information and materiel.
14. Platoon sends a situation report to the company commander.

## Conduct a Squad Assault (07-4-D9515)

**CONDITIONS:** The squad is moving as part of the platoon conducting a movement to contact or an attack. The enemy initiates direct fire contact.

**CUE:** This drill begins when the enemy initiates direct fire contact.

**STANDARDS:** The squad locates and suppresses the enemy, establishes supporting fire, and assaults the enemy position using fire and maneuver. The squad destroys or causes the enemy to withdraw, conducts consolidation and reorganizes.

### TASK STEPS

1. The team in contact immediately returns well-aimed fire on known enemy position(s) and assumes the nearest covered positions. Soldiers receiving fire take up nearest positions that afford protection from enemy fire (cover) and observation (concealment).
2. Soldiers in contact assume the nearest position that provides cover and concealment.
   1. Fire team Soldiers in contact move to positions (bound or crawl) where they can fire their weapons, position themselves to ensure that they have observation, fields of fire, cover, and concealment. They continue to fire and report known or suspected enemy positions to the fire team leader.
   2. The team leader directs fires using tracers or standard fire commands.
   3. The fire team not in contact takes covered and concealed positions in place, and observes to the flanks and rear of the squad.
   4. The squad leader reports contact to the platoon leader and moves toward the fire team in contact.
3. Lead team locates the enemy:
   1. Using sight and sound, the fire team in contact acquires known or suspected enemy positions.
   2. The fire team in contact begins to place well-aimed fire on suspected enemy positions.
   3. The squad leader moves to a position to observe the enemy and assess the situation.
   4. The squad leader requests, through the platoon leader, immediate suppression indirect fires (normally 60-mm mortars).
   5. The squad leader reports the enemy size and location, and any other information to the platoon leader. (As the platoon leader comes forward, he completes the squad leader's assessment of the situation.)
4. Team in contact suppresses the enemy.
   1. The squad leader determines if the fire team in contact can gain suppressive fire based on the volume and accuracy of the enemy fire.
   2. If the answer is YES, the fire team leader continues to suppress the enemy:
      1. The fire team destroys or suppresses enemy crew-served weapons first.
      2. The fire team places smoke (M203/320) on the enemy position to obscure it.
      3. The fire team leader continues to control fires using tracers or standard fire commands. Fires must be well-aimed and continue at a sustained rate with no lulls.
      4. Buddy teams fire their weapons so that both are not reloading their weapons at the same time.
   3. If the answer is NO, the squad leader then deploys the fire team not in contact to establish a support-by-fire position. The squad leader reports the situation to the platoon leader. Normally, the squad becomes the base-of-fire element for the platoon. The squad continues to suppress the enemy and responds to orders from the platoon leader. (The platoon leader, radiotelephone operator, forward observer, one machine gun team, squad leader of the next squad, platoon sergeant, and the other machine gun team are already moving forward according to Battle Drill 2, Platoon Assault.)
5. The unit leader maneuvers the assault elements into the assault.
   1. Squad leader adjusts fires (both direct and indirect) based on the rate of the assault element movement and the minimum safe distances of weapons systems.
   2. Once in position, the squad leader gives the prearranged signal for the supporting fire team to shift direct fires to the opposite flank of the enemy position.
   3. The assaulting fire team assumes and maintains effective fires throughout the assault. Handover of responsibility for direct fires from support element to the assault element is critical to prevent fratricide.
   4. If available, unit leader directs the forward observer to shift indirect fire (including smoke) to isolate the enemy position.
6. The assaulting element(s) fight through enemy position(s) using fire and movement.
   1. Team leader controls the movement of the team.
   2. Team leader assigns specific objectives for each buddy team and designates a base maneuver element.
   3. Base-of-fire elements maintain visual contact of the near flank of the assaulting element.
   4. The assault element conducts fire and movement based on volume and accuracy of enemy fires against his element and the amount of cover afforded by the terrain.
      1. Assault element leader designates a distance and direction for the assault element and moves with that element.
      2. Soldiers maintain contact with team members and leaders.
      3. Team leaders direct Soldiers to move as individuals or teams.
      4. Soldiers fire from covered positions. Soldiers move using 3- to 5-second rushes or the low or high crawl techniques, taking advantage of available cover and concealment.
      5. Soldiers time their firing and reloading in order to sustain their rate of fire.
      6. Team leaders maintain contact with the unit leader and pass signals to element members.
      7. If the assault element cannot continue to move, the unit leader deploys the element(s) to suppress the enemy and reports to higher headquarters.
7. The squad consolidates and reorganizes.
   1. Squad leaders establish local security.
   2. The squad leader signals for the base-of-fire element to move up into designated positions.
   3. The squad leader assigns sectors of fire for each element.
   4. The squad leader positions key weapons to cover the most dangerous avenue of approach.
   5. The squad leader begins coordination for ammunition resupply.
   6. Soldiers establish hasty fighting positions.
   7. Squad leader develops a quick fire plan.
   8. Squad leader place out observation posts to warn of enemy counterattacks.
   9. Reestablishes the chain of command.
   10. Redistributes and resupplies ammunition.
   11. Mans crew-served weapons, first.
   12. Redistributes critical equipment such as radios chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear equipment; and night vision devices.
   13. Treats and evaluates wounded.
   14. Fills vacancies in key positions.
   15. Searches, silences, segregates, safeguards, speeds, and tags detainees.
   16. The unit leader consolidates ammunition, casualties' and equipment reports.
8. Squad leader reports situation to platoon leader.

## BREAK CONTACT (07-3-D9505)

**CONDITIONS:** The unit is moving as part of a larger force, conducting a movement to contact or an attack. Following direct fire contact with the enemy, the unit leader decides to break contact.

**CUE:** This drill begins when the unit leader gives the command to break contact.

**STANDARDS:** The unit breaks contact using fire and movement, and continues to move until the enemy cannot observe or place fire on them. The unit leader reports the contact to higher headquarters.

### TASK STEPS

1. The unit leader directs an element to suppress the enemy.
2. The unit leader directs the vehicles to support the disengagement of the dismounted element. (If the vehicles cannot support the disengagement of the dismounted element, the platoon leader directs one squad or fire team to suppress by fire to support the disengagement of the remainder of the element.)
3. The unit leader orders a distance and direction, terrain feature, or last rally point of the movement of the element in contact.
4. The unit leader employs indirect fires to suppress enemy position(s). (See figure 8-3.)

```text
Figure 8-3. 07-3-D9505. Employing indirect fires to suppress enemy
```

5. The bounding element moves to occupy the overwatch position, employs smoke (M320, grenade launchers, indirect fires, and other options) to screen movement. If necessary, employs fragmentation and concussion grenades to facilitate breaking contact.
6. The base-of-fire element continues to suppress the enemy.
7. The moving element occupies their overwatch position and engages enemy position(s). (See figure 8-4 on page 8-12.)
